Deshret - Wikipedia Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Significance 2 Records 3 Phonogram 4 See also 5 Gallery 6 References Toggle the table of contents Deshret 20 languages ??????? Az?rbaycanca ????????? ?eština Deutsch Español ????? Français Bahasa Melayu Norsk bokmål Polski Português ??????? Simple English Slovenš?ina Srpskohrvatski / ?????????????? Svenska ??? ?????????? Ti?ng Vi?t Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Red crown of Lower Egypt "Red crown" redirects here. For the Missouri tavern, see Red Crown Tourist Court. Deshret Deshret, the Red Crown of Lower Egypt Details Country Ancient Egypt, Lower Egypt Deshret, Red Crown (crown as determinative) in hieroglyphs Deshret (Ancient Egyptian: ?????, romanized: dšrt, lit.?'Red One') was the Red Crown of Lower Egypt. It was red bowl shaped with a protruding curlicue. When combined with the Hedjet (White Crown) of Upper Egypt, it forms the Pschent (Double Crown), in ancient Egyptian called the sekhemti. The Red Crown in Egyptian language hieroglyphs eventually was used as the vertical letter "n". The original "n" hieroglyph from the Predynastic Period and the Old Kingdom was the sign depicting ripples of water. The word Deshret also referred to the desert Red Land on either side of Kemet (Black Land), the fertile Nile river basin. Significance [edit] In mythology, the earth deity Geb, original ruler of Egypt, invested Horus with the rule over Lower Egypt.[1] The Egyptian pharaohs, who saw themselves as successors of Horus, wore the deshret to symbolize their authority over Lower Egypt.[2] Other deities wore the deshret too, or were identified with it, such as the protective serpent goddess Wadjet and the creator-goddess of Sais, Neith, who often is shown wearing the Red Crown.[3] The Red Crown would later be combined with the White Crown of Upper Egypt to form the Double Crown, symbolizing the rule over the whole country, "The Two Lands" as the Egyptians expressed it.[4] Records [edit] No Red Crown has been found. Several ancient representations indicate it was woven like a basket from plant fiber such as grass, straw, flax, palm leaf, or reed.[citation needed] The Red Crown frequently is mentioned in texts and depicted in reliefs and statues. An early example is the depiction of the victorious pharaoh wearing the deshret on the Narmer Palette. A label from the reign of Djer records a royal visit to the shrine of the Deshret which may have been located at Buto in the Nile delta.[5] The fact that no crown has ever been found buried with any of the pharaohs, even in relatively intact tombs, might suggest that it was passed from one reign to the next, much as in present-day monarchies. Toby Wilkinson has cited the iconography on rock art in the Eastern Desert region as depicting what he interpreted to be among the earliest representations of the royal crowns and suggested the Red Crown could have originated in the southern Nile Valley.[6] Phonogram [edit] 1 Red Crown, Deshret 2 also, vertical "N" in hieroglyphs Deshret, the ancient Egyptian Red Crown, is one of the oldest Egyptian hieroglyphs. As an iconographic element, it is used on the famous palette of Pharaoh Narmer as the "Red Crown of the Delta", the Delta being Lower Egypt. The first usage of the Red Crown was in iconography as the symbol for Lower Egypt with the Nile Delta, horizontal letter 'n', Gardiner no. 35, Later it came to be used in the Egyptian language as an alphabetic uniliteral, vertical form for letter "n" as a phoneme or preposition. It became functional in running hieroglyphic texts, where either the horizontal or vertical form preposition satisfied space requirements. Both the vertical and horizontal forms are prepositional equivalents, with the horizontal letter n, the N-water ripple (n hieroglyph) being more common, as well as more common to form parts of Egyptian language words requiring the phoneme 'n'. One old use of the red crown hieroglyph is to make the word: 'in'!, (formerly an-(a-with dot)-(the "vertical feather" hieroglyph a, plus the red crown). Egyptian "in" is used at the beginning of a text and translates as: Behold!, or Lo!, and is an emphatic. The Red Crown is also used as a determinative, most notably in the word for deshret. It is also used in other words or names of gods. Use in the Rosetta Stone Rosetta Stone usage of Red Crown, not as preposition: part of Pschent (Double Crown), and part of "Taui", the name for Upper and Lower Egypt (used combined with a Crossroads (hieroglyph)) In the 198 BC Rosetta Stone, the 'Red Crown' as hieroglyph has the usage mostly of the vertical form of the preposition "n". In running text, word endings are not always at the end of hieroglyph blocks; when they are at the end, a simple transition to start the next block is a vertical separator, in this case the preposition, vertical n, (thus a space saver). Since the start of the next hieroglyphic block could also be started with a horizontal "n" at the bottom of the previous block, it should be thought that the vertical "n" is also chosen for a visual effect; in other words, it visually spreads out the running text of words, instead of piling horizontal prepositions in a more tight text. Visually it is also a hieroglyph that takes up more 'space'-(versus a straight-line type for the horizontal water ripple); so it may have a dual purpose of a less compact text, and a better segue-transition to the next words. The Red Crown hieroglyph is used 35 times in the Rosetta Stone; only 4 times is it used as a non-preposition. It averages once per line usage in the 36 line Decree of Memphis (Ptolemy V)-(Rosetta Stone). See also [edit] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Red crown. Atef – Hedjet Crown with feathers identified with Osiris Khepresh – Blue or War Crown also called Royal Crown Gallery [edit] Examples of representations modern drawing of a pharaoh with a red crown Ramesside Period ostracon, pharaoh wearing Red Crown Narmer Palette, front The vertical letter N, as preposition, or determinative in the Egyptian language Close-up of Narmer Palette, Pharaoh Narmer with crown Bronze statuette of a Kushite king wearing the red crown of Lower Egypt; 25th Dynasty, c. 670 BCE, Neues Museum, Berlin Sandstone statue of Mentuhotep II; 11th Dynasty, c. 2060–2009 BCE, Egyptian Museum, Cairo A guardian statue wearing the red crown which reflected the facial features of the reigning king, probably Amenemhat II or Senwosret II, and which functioned as a divine guardian for the imiut; made of cedar wood and plaster c. 1919–1885 BC[7] Deshret (vertical letter N) in hieroglyphic writing Philistine captives at Medinet Habu Stele of Tchia at the Louvre Apep being slain References [edit] ^ Ewa Wasilewska, Creation Stories of the Middle East, Jessica Kingsley Publishers 2000, p.128 ^ Toby A. H. Wilkinson, Early Dynastic Egypt, Routledge 1999, p.194 ^ George Hart, The Routledge Dictionary Of Egyptian Gods And Goddesses, p.100 ^ Ana Ruiz, The Spirit of Ancient Egypt, Algora Publishing 2001, p.8 ^ Toby A. H. Wilkinson, Early Dynastic Egypt, Routledge 1999, p.284 ^ Wilkinson, Toby (2003). Genesis of the Pharaohs : dramatic new discoveries rewrite the origins of ancient Egypt. London: Thames & Hudson. pp. 54–82. ISBN 0500051224. ^ "Guardian Figure". www.metmuseum.org. Metropolitan Museum of Art. Retrieved 9 February 2022. Budge. An Egyptian Hieroglyphic Dictionary, E.A.Wallace Budge, (Dover Publications), c 1978, (c 1920), Dover edition, 1978. (In two volumes) (softcover, ISBN 0-486-23615-3) Budge. The Rosetta Stone, E.A.Wallace Budge, (Dover Publications), c 1929, Dover edition(unabridged), 1989. (softcover, ISBN 0-486-26163-8) v t e Ancient Egyptian religion Beliefs Afterlife Creation myths Isfet Maa Kheru Maat Mythology Numerology Osiris myth Philosophy Soul Practices Canopic jars Embalming ritual Funerals Mortuary temples Offering formula Opening of the mouth Pyramids Temples Veneration of the dead Deities (list) Ogdoad Amun and Amunet Heh and Hauhet Kek and Kauket Nu and Naunet Ennead Atum Geb Isis Nephthys Nut Osiris Set Shu Tefnut Triads Elephantine Triad Theban Triad A Aani Aati Abaset Abtu Ahmose-Nefertari Aker Akhty Amenhotep, son of Hapu Amesemi Am-heh Ammit Amu-Aa Anat Andjety Anput Anubis Anuket Apedemak Apep Apesh Apis Aqen Arensnuphis Ash Assessors of Maat Astarte Aten B Baal Baalat Gebal Babi Banebdjedet Ba-Pef Bastet Bat Bata Bennu Bes Beset Buchis C Cavern deities of the underworld Celestial Ferryman D Dedun Dionysus-Osiris Djedefhor Duamutef Duau G Gate deities of the underworld Gengen-Wer H Ha Hapi Hapy Harmachis Harpocrates Harsomtus Hathor Hatmehit Hauron Hedetet Hedjhotep Heka Hemen Hemsut Henet Henkhisesui Heqaib Heqet Hermanubis Hermes Trismegistus Heru-ur Heryshaf Hesat Horus Hu Hutchai I Iabet Iah Iat Igai Ihy Ikhemu-sek Imentet Imhotep Imsety Ipy Irer Ishtar Iunit Iusaaset J Jupiter Ammon K Kagemni I Kebechet Khensit Khenti-Amentiu Khenti-kheti Khepri Khereduankh Kherty Khnum Khonsu Kneph Kolanthes Kothar-wa-Khasis M Maahes Maat Mafdet Mandulis Medjed Mehen Mehet-Weret Mehit Menhit Meret Meretseger Meskhenet Min Mnevis Montu Mut N Nebethetepet Nebtuwi Nefertem Nehebkau Nehmetawy Neith Nekhbet Nemty Neper Nepit O Onuris P Pakhet Perit Petbe Ptah Ptahhotep Q Qebehsenuef Qebui Qed-her Qetesh R Ra Raet-Tawy Rekhyt Rem Renenutet Renpet Renpetneferet Repyt Resheph S Sah Satis Sebiumeker Sedjem Seker Sekhmet Serapis Serket Seshat Shai Shed Shehbui Shesmetet Shezmu Sia Sobek Sopdet Sopdu Souls of Pe and Nekhen T Ta-Bitjet Tatenen Taweret Tayt Teka-her Thoth Tjenenyet Tutu U Unut W Wadjet Wadj-wer Weneg Wepset Wepwawet Werethekau Wosret Y Yam Creatures Akhekh Apshait Criosphinx Griffin Hieracosphinx Medjed Serpopard Sha Sphinx Uraeus Characters Djadjaemankh Djedi Rededjet Ubaoner Locations Aaru Akhet Benben Duat Land of Manu The Indestructibles Symbols and objects Ankh Anra scarab Atef Cartouche Corn mummy Cowroid Crook and flail Crown of justification Deshret Djed Egyptian obelisk Egyptian pool Eye of Horus Eye of Ra Hedjet Hemhem crown Hennu Horus on the Crocodiles Hypocephalus Imiut fetish Khepresh Kneph Menat Modius Nebu Nemes Neshmet Ouroboros Pschent Scarab Serekh Shen ring Solar barque Tyet Ushabti Vulture crown Was-sceptre Winged sun Writings Amduat Books of Breathing Book of Caverns Book of the Dead Book of the Earth Book of Gates Book of the Heavenly Cow Book of Traversing Eternity Coffin Texts Enigmatic Book of the Netherworld Festival Songs of Isis and Nephthys Great Hymn to the Aten Litany of the Eye of Horus Litany of Re Pyramid Texts Spell of the Twelve Caves The Contendings of Horus and Seth Festivals Beautiful Festival of the Valley Cattle count Coronation of the pharaoh Min festival Mysteries of Osiris Opet Festival Sed festival Related religions Atenism Church of the Most High Goddess Gnosticism Hermeticism Kemetic Orthodoxy Kemetism Kushite religion Mysteries of Isis Temple of Set Thelema Ancient Egypt portal Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Deshret&oldid=1284610554" Categories: Lower Egypt Crowns (headgear) Egyptian hieroglyphs: crowns-dress-staves Egyptian artefact types Egyptian hieroglyphs Wadjet Hidden categories: Pages using the WikiHiero extension Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles containing Ancient Egyptian-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from January 2025 Commons category link is on Wikidata Pages using gallery without a media namespace prefix This page was last edited on 8 April 2025, at 17:53 (UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Deshret 20 languages Add topic