Hedjet - Wikipedia Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 See also 3 References Toggle the table of contents Hedjet 20 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Български Čeština Deutsch Español فارسی Français Bahasa Melayu Norsk bokmål Polski Português Русский Simple English Slovenščina Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Svenska ไทย Українська Tiếng Việt Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia White Crown of Higher Egypt Hedjet Hedjet, the white crown of Upper Egypt Details Country Ancient Egypt, Upper Egypt Hedjet ḥḏt in hieroglyphs Hedjet (Ancient Egyptian: 𓌉𓏏𓋑, romanized: ḥḏt, lit. 'White One') is the White Crown of pharaonic Upper Egypt. After the unification of Upper and Lower Egypt, it was combined with the Deshret, the Red Crown of Lower Egypt, to form the Pschent, the double crown of Egypt. The symbol sometimes used for the White Crown was the vulture goddess Nekhbet shown next to the head of the cobra goddess Wadjet, the uraeus on the Pschent.[1] History [edit] Head of a royal statue wearing the White Crown. Between 1493 and 1482 BC, New Kingdom, from the Karnak precinct of Amun-Ra. Museo Egizio, Turin. The white crown, along with the red crown, has a long history with each of their respective representations going back into the Predynastic Period, indicating that kingship had been the base of Egyptian society for some time. The earliest image of the hedjet was thought to have been in the Qustul in Nubia. According to Jane Roy, "At the time of Williams’ argument, the Qustul cemetery and the ‘royal’ iconography found there was dated to the Naqada IIIA period, thus antedating royal cemeteries in Egypt of the Naqada IIIB phase. New evidence from Abydos, however, particularly the excavation of Cemetery U and the tomb U-j, dating to Naqada IIIA has shown that this iconography appears earlier in Egypt".[2] Frank Yurco stated that depictions of pharaonic iconography such as the royal crowns, Horus falcons and victory scenes were concentrated in the Upper Egyptian Naqada culture and A-Group Nubia. He further elaborated that "Egyptian writing arose in Naqadan Upper Egypt and A-Group Nubia, and not in the Delta cultures, where the direct Western Asian contact was made, which further vitiates the Mesopotamian-influence argument".[3] According to David Wengrow, the A-Group polity of the late 4th millenninum BCE is poorly understood since most of the archaeological remains are submerged underneath Lake Nasser.[4] Stan Hendrick, John Coleman Darnell and Maria Gatto in 2012 excavated petroglyphic engravings from Nag el-Hamdulab in Aswan, the extreme southern region of Egypt that borders the Sudan, which featured representations of boat procession, solar symbolism and the earliest depiction of the white crown with an estimated dating range between 3200BC and 3100BC.[5] Nekhbet, the tutelary goddess of Nekhebet (modern el Kab) near Hierakonpolis, was depicted as a woman, sometimes with the head of a vulture, wearing the white crown.[6] The falcon god Horus of Hierakonpolis (Egyptian: Nekhen) was generally shown wearing a white crown.[7] A famous depiction of the white crown is on the Narmer palette found at Hierakonpolis in which the king of the South wearing the hedjet is shown triumphing over his northern enemies. The kings of the united Egypt saw themselves as successors of Horus. Vases from the reign of Khasekhemwy show the king as Horus wearing the white crown.[8] As with the deshret (red crown), no example of the white crown has been found. It is unknown how it was constructed and what materials were used. Felt or leather have been suggested, but this is purely speculative. Like the deshret, the hedjet may have been woven like a basket from plant fiber such as grass, straw, flax, palm leaf, or reed. The fact that no crown has ever been found, even in relatively intact royal tombs such as that of Tutankhamun, suggests the crowns may have been passed from one monarch to the next, much as in present-day monarchies. modern drawing of a pharaoh with a white crown Early Dynastic usage of the white crown: the Narmer palette of Pharaoh Narmer Small bronze statuary usage with the hedjet, white crown Bronze statuette of a Kushite king wearing the white crown of Upper Egypt; 25th Dynasty, 670 BCE, Neues Museum, Berlin Painted relief of Mentuhotep II from his mortuary temple at Deir el-Bahri; 11th Dynasty, c. 2060–2009 BCE A couple of statuettes which represent a Middle Kingdom pharaoh as King of Upper Egypt (left, with the white crown) and King of Lower Egypt (right, with the red crown); wood, from el-Lisht, 12th dynasty, Middle Kingdom (Egyptian Museum, main floor, room 22, JE44951) See also [edit] Wikimedia Commons has media related to white crown. Atef – hedjet crown with feathers identified with Osiris Khepresh – blue or war crown also called royal crown References [edit] ^ Arthur Maurice Hocart, The Life-Giving Myth, Routledge 2004, p.209 ^ Roy, Jane (February 2011). The Politics of Trade:Egypt and Lower Nubia in the 4th Millennium BC. Brill. p. 215. ISBN 9789004196117. Retrieved 16 June 2015. ^ Frank J.Yurco (1996). "The Origin and Development of Ancient Nile Valley Writing," in Egypt in Africa, Theodore Celenko (ed). Indianapolis, Ind.: Indianapolis Museum of Art. pp. 34–35. ISBN 0-936260-64-5. ^ Wengrow, David (2023). "Ancient Egypt and Nubian: Kings of Flood and Kings of Rain" in Great Kingdoms of Africa, John Parker (eds). [S.l.]: THAMES & HUDSON. pp. 1–40. ISBN 978-0500252529. ^ Hendrickx, Stan; Darnell, John Coleman; Gatto, Maria Carmela (December 2012). "The earliest representations of royal power in Egypt: the rock drawings of Nag el-Hamdulab (Aswan)". Antiquity. 86 (334): 1068–1083. doi:10.1017/S0003598X00048250. ISSN 0003-598X. S2CID 53631029. ^ Cherine Badawi, Egypt, 2004, p.550 ^ Toby A. H. Wilkinson, Early Dynastic Egypt, Routledge 1999, p.285 ^ Jill Kamil, The Ancient Egyptians: Life in the Old Kingdom, American Univ in Cairo Press 1996, p.61 v t e Ancient Egyptian religion Beliefs Afterlife Creation myths Isfet Maa Kheru Maat Mythology Numerology Osiris myth Philosophy Soul Practices Canopic jars Embalming ritual Funerals Mortuary temples Offering formula Opening of the mouth Pyramids Temples Veneration of the dead Deities (list) Ogdoad Amun and Amunet Heh and Hauhet Kek and Kauket Nu and Naunet Ennead Atum Geb Isis Nephthys Nut Osiris Set Shu Tefnut Triads Elephantine Triad Theban Triad A Aani Aati Abaset Abtu Ahmose-Nefertari Aker Akhty Amenhotep, son of Hapu Amesemi Am-heh Ammit Amu-Aa Anat Andjety Anput Anubis Anuket Apedemak Apep Apesh Apis Aqen Arensnuphis Arsinoe II Ash Assessors of Maat Astarte Aten B Baal Baalat Gebal Babi Banebdjedet Ba-Pef Bastet Bat Bata Bennu Bes Beset Buchis C Cavern deities of the underworld Celestial Ferryman D Dedun Dionysus-Osiris Djedefhor Duamutef Duau G Gate deities of the underworld Gengen-Wer H Ha Hapi Hapy Harmachis Harpocrates Harsomtus Hathor Hatmehit Hauron Hedetet Hedjhotep Heka Hemen Hemsut Henet Henkhisesui Heqaib Heqet Hermanubis Hermes Trismegistus Heru-ur Heryshaf Hesat Horus Hu Hutchai I Iabet Iah Iat Igai Ihy Ikhemu-sek Imentet Imhotep Imsety Ipy Irer Ishtar Iunit Iusaaset J Jupiter Ammon K Kagemni I Kebechet Khensit Khenti-Amentiu Khenti-kheti Khepri Khereduankh Kherty Khnum Khonsu Kneph Kolanthes Kothar-wa-Khasis M Maahes Maat Mafdet Mandulis Medjed Mehen Mehet-Weret Mehit Menhit Meret Meretseger Meskhenet Min Mnevis Montu Mut N Nebethetepet Nebtuwi Nefertem Nehebkau Nehmetawy Neith Nekhbet Nemty Neper Nepit O Onuris P Pakhet Perit Petbe Peteese Pihor Ptah Ptahhotep Q Qebehsenuef Qebui Qed-her Qetesh R Ra Raet-Tawy Rekhyt Rem Renenutet Renpet Renpetneferet Repyt Resheph Ruty S Sah Satis Sebiumeker Sedjem Sekhmet Serapis Serket Seshat Shai Shed Shehbui Shesmetet Shezmu Sia Sobek Sokar Sopdet Sopdu Souls of Pe and Nekhen T Ta-Bitjet Tatenen Taweret Tayt Teka-her Thoth Tjenenyet Tutu U Unut W Wadjet Wadj-wer Weneg Wepset Wepwawet Werethekau Wosret Y Yam Creatures Akhekh Apshait Criosphinx Griffin Hieracosphinx Medjed Serpopard Sha Sphinx Uraeus Characters Djadjaemankh Djedi Rededjet Ubaoner Locations Aaru Akhet Benben Duat Land of Manu The Indestructibles Symbols and objects Ankh Anra scarab Atef Cartouche Corn mummy Cowroid Crook and flail Crown of justification Deshret Djed Egyptian obelisk Egyptian pool Eye of Horus Eye of Ra Hedjet Hemhem crown Hennu Horus on the Crocodiles Hypocephalus Imiut fetish Khepresh Kneph Menat Modius Nebu Nemes Neshmet Ouroboros Pschent Scarab Serekh Shen ring Solar barque Tyet Ushabti Vulture crown Was-sceptre Winged sun Writings Amduat Books of Breathing Book of Caverns Book of the Dead Book of the Earth Book of Gates Book of the Heavenly Cow Book of Traversing Eternity Coffin Texts Enigmatic Book of the Netherworld Festival Songs of Isis and Nephthys Great Hymn to the Aten Litany of the Eye of Horus Litany of Re Pyramid Texts Spell of the Twelve Caves The Contendings of Horus and Seth Festivals Beautiful Festival of the Valley Cattle count Coronation of the pharaoh Min festival Mysteries of Osiris Opet Festival Sed festival Related religions Atenism Church of the Most High Goddess Gnosticism Hermeticism Kemetic Orthodoxy Kemetism Kushite religion Mysteries of Isis Temple of Set Thelema Ancient Egypt portal Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Hedjet&oldid=1284610282" Categories: Egyptian artefact types Crowns (headgear) Upper Egypt Hidden categories: Pages using the WikiHiero extension Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Ancient Egyptian-language text Commons category link is locally defined This page was last edited on 8 April 2025, at 17:51 (UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Hedjet 20 languages Add topic