Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Main Page Main Page Talk English Read View source View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View source View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikimedia Foundation MediaWiki Meta-Wiki Wikimedia Outreach Multilingual Wikisource Wikispecies Wikibooks Wikidata Wikifunctions Wikimania Wikinews Wikiquote Wikisource Wikiversity Wikivoyage Wiktionary Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Welcome to Wikipedia , the free encyclopedia that anyone can edit. 118,341 active editors 6,985,358 articles in English From today's featured article The Aineta aryballos is an Ancient Greek aryballos (a small, spherical flask or vase), made between approximately 625 and 570 BCE in the city of Corinth in southern Greece. Approximately 6.35 centimetres (2.50 in) in both height and diameter, it was intended to contain perfumed oil or unguent, and is likely to have been owned by a high-class courtesan (hetaira) by the name of Aineta. The vase's illegal sale to the British Museum in 1865 led to the prosecution of its seller, the Athenian professor and art dealer Athanasios Rhousopoulos, and exposed his widespread involvement in antiquities crime. The vase is inscribed with a portrait, probably that of Aineta, who is named in the inscription on the vase. The aryballos is likely to have been found in a grave, probably that of Aineta. In 1877, Rhousopoulos was fined for selling the vase in contravention of Greek law. The case represented a relatively rare successful use of state power against the illegal trade in Ancient Greek artefacts. (Full article...) Recently featured: Terry Fox Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde (1887 play) Fantastic Novels Archive By email More featured articles About Did you know ... George Frazier Miller ... that George Frazier Miller (pictured) raised and spent $10 during his election campaign for a seat in the United States Congress in 1918? ... that, near the ending of the 2005 interactive storytelling video game Façade, two characters portrayed through AI chatbots ask the player for relationship advice? ... that Lebanese actress Cynthya Karam volunteers as a clown doctor in children's hospitals? ... that a Wisconsin TV station claimed the first-ever broadcast of a lunar eclipse, which it captured by moving a studio camera into its parking lot? ... that Khujand gained independence just a year before it was conquered by the Russian Empire? ... that Prince Louis of Wales is the first British prince to be ranked behind an elder sister in the line of succession? ... that Klingenheben's law is usually referred to in the singular, but in fact comprises four independent sound changes? ... that Aquilegia vulgaris was associated with a fertility goddess in ancient Greece, symbolized sacredness for Flemish painters, and was an omen of death in Hamlet? ... that Edwin Rist stole hundreds of rare birds to make into fishing lures? Archive Start a new article Nominate an article In the news Pope Francis Militants attack a group of tourists in Indian-administered Kashmir, killing 28 people. Pope Francis (pictured) dies at the age of 88. Daniel Noboa is re-elected president of Ecuador. Peruvian writer and Nobel Prize in Literature laureate Mario Vargas Llosa dies at the age of 89. A nightclub roof collapse in Santo Domingo, Dominican Republic, kills 232 people. Ongoing: Gaza war M23 campaign Russian invasion of Ukraine timeline Sudanese civil war timeline Recent deaths: Fatima Hassouna Francis Davis Werner Thissen Joe Thompson Kyren Lacy Aliza Magen-Halevi Nominate an article On this day April 23: National Sovereignty and Children's Day in Turkey (1920) Liberation of Flossenbürg 1467 – Ottoman wars in Europe: Albanian leader Skanderbeg defeated an Ottoman army under Ballaban Badera to raise the siege of Krujë. 1945 – World War II: The US Army's 90th Infantry Division liberated Flossenbürg concentration camp (pictured) in Germany, freeing 1,500 prisoners. 1976 – The American band the Ramones released their debut album, which became highly influential on the emerging punk rock movement. 1979 – Blair Peach, a New Zealand teacher, was fatally injured after being knocked unconscious during an Anti-Nazi League demonstration against a National Front election meeting in Southall, London. 2018 – A man intentionally struck pedestrians with a van on Yonge Street in Toronto, Canada, leading to 11 deaths. Joan of France (b. 1464) Pandita Ramabai (b. 1858) Satyajit Ray (d. 1992) More anniversaries: April 22 April 23 April 24 Archive By email List of days of the year About Today's featured picture The Chandos portrait is the most famous of the portraits that are believed to depict William Shakespeare (c. 23 April 1564 – 23 April 1616). Painted between 1600 and 1610, it may have served as the basis for the engraved portrait of Shakespeare used in his First Folio in 1623. John Taylor (c. 1580–1653) is thought by several scholars to have painted the portrait. It is named for the 3rd Duke of Chandos, who formerly owned the painting. The portrait was given to the National Portrait Gallery, London, on its foundation in 1856, and it is listed as the first work in its collection. Painting credit: John Taylor; image retouched by Dcoetzee Recently featured: Édouard de Reszke Sherlock Jr. Trou au Natron Archive More featured pictures Other areas of Wikipedia Community portal – The central hub for editors, with resources, links, tasks, and announcements. Village pump – Forum for discussions about Wikipedia itself, including policies and technical issues. Site news – Sources of news about Wikipedia and the broader Wikimedia movement. Teahouse – Ask basic questions about using or editing Wikipedia. Help desk – Ask questions about using or editing Wikipedia. Reference desk – Ask research questions about encyclopedic topics. Content portals – A unique way to navigate the encyclopedia. Wikipedia's sister projects Wikipedia is written by volunteer editors and hosted by the Wikimedia Foundation, a non-profit organization that also hosts a range of other volunteer projects: Commons Free media repository MediaWiki Wiki software development Meta-Wiki Wikimedia project coordination Wikibooks Free textbooks and manuals Wikidata Free knowledge base Wikinews Free-content news Wikiquote Collection of quotations Wikisource Free-content library Wikispecies Directory of species Wikiversity Free learning tools Wikivoyage Free travel guide Wiktionary Dictionary and thesaurus Wikipedia languages This Wikipedia is written in English. Many other Wikipedias are available; some of the largest are listed below. 1,000,000+ articles ??????? Deutsch Español ?????? Français Italiano Nederlands ??? Polski Português ??????? Svenska ?????????? Ti?ng Vi?t ?? 250,000+ articles Bahasa Indonesia Bahasa Melayu Bân-lâm-gú ????????? Català ?eština Dansk Eesti Esperanto Euskara ????? ??????? ??? Magyar Norsk bokmål Român? Simple English Sloven?ina Srpski Srpskohrvatski Suomi Türkçe O?zbekcha 50,000+ articles Asturianu Az?rbaycanca ????? Bosanski ????? ???????? Frysk Gaeilge Galego Hrvatski ??????? Kurdî Latviešu Lietuvi? ?????? ?????????? ?????????? Norsk nynorsk ?????? Shqip Slovenš?ina ??? ?????? ???? Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Main_Page&oldid=1276485694" 49 languages ??????? Az?rbaycanca ????? ????????? Bosanski Català ?eština Dansk Deutsch Eesti ???????? Español Esperanto Euskara ????? Français Galego ??? Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano ????? ??????? Latviešu Lietuvi? Magyar ?????????? Bahasa Melayu Nederlands ??? Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Polski Português Român? ??????? Simple English Sloven?ina Slovenš?ina ????? ?????? / srpski Srpskohrvatski / ?????????????? Suomi Svenska ??? Türkçe ?????????? Ti?ng Vi?t ?? This page was last edited on 19 February 2025, at 03:32 (UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Main Page 49 languages Add topic