Pschent - Wikipedia Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Archaeology 3 Mythology 4 Gallery 5 See also 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Pschent 24 languages Afrikaans العربية Azərbaycanca Български Català Čeština Deutsch Ελληνικά فارسی Français ქართული Bahasa Melayu 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Русский Simple English Slovenščina Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Svenska ไทย Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Ancient Egyptian double crown Pschent Pschent, the double crown of Egypt Details Country Ancient Egypt Predecessors Deshret Hedjet The pschent (/pskʰént/; Greek ψχέντ) was the double crown worn by rulers in ancient Egypt. The ancient Egyptians generally referred to it as Pa-sekhemty (pꜣ-sḫm.ty), the Two Powerful Ones, from which the Greek term is derived.[1] It combined the White Hedjet Crown of Upper Egypt and the Red Deshret Crown of Lower Egypt. The Pschent represented the pharaoh's power over all of unified Egypt.[2] It bore two animal emblems: an Egyptian cobra, known as the uraeus, ready to strike, which symbolized the Lower Egyptian goddess Wadjet; and a vulture representing the Upper Egyptian tutelary goddess Nekhbet. These were fastened to the front of the Pschent and referred to as the Two Ladies. History [edit] Pschent "Double Crown" in hieroglyphs The invention of the Pschent is generally attributed to the First Dynasty pharaoh Menes, but the first one known to wear a Double Crown was the First Dynasty pharaoh Djet: a rock inscription shows his Horus wearing it.[3] The king list on the Palermo Stone, which begins with the names of Lower Egyptian pharaohs (nowadays thought to have been mythological demigods), shown wearing the Red Crown, marks the unification of the country by giving the Pschent to all First Dynasty and later pharaohs.[4] The Cairo fragment, on the other hand, shows these prehistoric rulers wearing the Pschent.[5] Archaeology [edit] As is the case with the Deshret and the Hedjet Crowns, no Pschent is currently known to have survived. It is known only from statuary, depictions, inscriptions, and ancient tales. Mythology [edit] Among the deities sometimes depicted wearing the Double Crown are Horus[6] and Atum or Ra both representing the pharaoh or having a special relationship to the pharaoh.[7] Gallery [edit] modern drawing of a pharaoh with a double crown Fragment of an ivory label showing pharaoh Den wearing the double crown of Upper and Lower Egypt. Discovered in the tomb of Den at Umm El Qa'ab, now in the Egyptian Museum Pharaoh Ptolemy VIII between the goddesses Wadjet (symbolizing lower Egypt) and Nekhbet (symbolizing upper Egypt). Bas-relief on wall of Temple of Edfu, Egypt Ring of Ptolemy VI Philometor wearing the Pschent Double Crown, 3rd to 2nd Century BC. Ptolemaic rulers wore the Pschent in Egypt only and wore the Greek diadem in the other territories Statue head Senusret III wearing a pschent Horus falcon with Double Crown Statue of Amenhotep III wearing a pschent See also [edit] Atef – Hedjet Crown with feathers identified with Osiris Khepresh – Blue or War Crown also called Royal Crown N-red crown (n hieroglyph) N-water ripple (n hieroglyph) Uraeus – Rearing Cobra References [edit] ^ Griffith, Francis Llewellyn, A Collection of Hieroglyphs: A Contribution to the History of Egyptian Writing, the Egypt Exploration Fund 1898, p.56 ^ Dunand, Françoise; Christiane Zivie-Coche, Gods and Men in Egypt: 3000 BCE to 395 CE, Cornell University Press 2004, pp.32f. ^ Wilkinson, Toby A. H., Early Dynastic Egypt, Routledge 1999, p.196 ^ Trigger, B. G. (1982). "The rise of civilization in Egypt". In Clark, J. Desmond (ed.). The Cambridge History of Africa. Volume 1, From the Earliest Times to c.500 BC. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. p. 521. doi:10.1017/CHOL9780521222150.008. ISBN 9781139054553. ^ Kemp, Barry John, Ancient Egypt: Anatomy Of A Civilization, Routledge 2006, p.92 ^ Zandee, Jan, Studies in Egyptian Religion: Dedicated to Professor Jan Zandee, Brill 1982, p.74 ^ The New Encyclopædia Britannica, Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc. 2005, p. 689 External links [edit] Media related to pschent at Wikimedia Commons The dictionary definition of pschent at Wiktionary v t e Ancient Egyptian religion Beliefs Afterlife Creation myths Isfet Maa Kheru Maat Mythology Numerology Osiris myth Philosophy Soul Practices Canopic jars Embalming ritual Funerals Mortuary temples Offering formula Opening of the mouth Pyramids Temples Veneration of the dead Deities (list) Ogdoad Amun and Amunet Heh and Hauhet Kek and Kauket Nu and Naunet Ennead Atum Geb Isis Nephthys Nut Osiris Set Shu Tefnut Triads Elephantine Triad Theban Triad A Aani Aati Abaset Abtu Ahmose-Nefertari Aker Akhty Amenhotep, son of Hapu Amesemi Am-heh Ammit Amu-Aa Anat Andjety Anput Anubis Anuket Apedemak Apep Apesh Apis Aqen Arensnuphis Arsinoe II Ash Assessors of Maat Astarte Aten B Baal Baalat Gebal Babi Banebdjedet Ba-Pef Bastet Bat Bata Bennu Bes Beset Buchis C Cavern deities of the underworld Celestial Ferryman D Dedun Dionysus-Osiris Djedefhor Duamutef Duau G Gate deities of the underworld Gengen-Wer H Ha Hapi Hapy Harmachis Harpocrates Harsomtus Hathor Hatmehit Hauron Hedetet Hedjhotep Heka Hemen Hemsut Henet Henkhisesui Heqaib Heqet Hermanubis Hermes Trismegistus Heru-ur Heryshaf Hesat Horus Hu Hutchai I Iabet Iah Iat Igai Ihy Ikhemu-sek Imentet Imhotep Imsety Ipy Irer Ishtar Iunit Iusaaset J Jupiter Ammon K Kagemni I Kebechet Khensit Khenti-Amentiu Khenti-kheti Khepri Khereduankh Kherty Khnum Khonsu Kneph Kolanthes Kothar-wa-Khasis M Maahes Maat Mafdet Mandulis Medjed Mehen Mehet-Weret Mehit Menhit Meret Meretseger Meskhenet Min Mnevis Montu Mut N Nebethetepet Nebtuwi Nefertem Nehebkau Nehmetawy Neith Nekhbet Nemty Neper Nepit O Onuris P Pakhet Perit Petbe Peteese Pihor Ptah Ptahhotep Q Qebehsenuef Qebui Qed-her Qetesh R Ra Raet-Tawy Rekhyt Rem Renenutet Renpet Renpetneferet Repyt Resheph Ruty S Sah Satis Sebiumeker Sedjem Sekhmet Serapis Serket Seshat Shai Shed Shehbui Shesmetet Shezmu Sia Sobek Sokar Sopdet Sopdu Souls of Pe and Nekhen T Ta-Bitjet Tatenen Taweret Tayt Teka-her Thoth Tjenenyet Tutu U Unut W Wadjet Wadj-wer Weneg Wepset Wepwawet Werethekau Wosret Y Yam Creatures Akhekh Apshait Criosphinx Griffin Hieracosphinx Medjed Serpopard Sha Sphinx Uraeus Characters Djadjaemankh Djedi Rededjet Ubaoner Locations Aaru Akhet Benben Duat Land of Manu The Indestructibles Symbols and objects Ankh Anra scarab Atef Cartouche Corn mummy Cowroid Crook and flail Crown of justification Deshret Djed Egyptian obelisk Egyptian pool Eye of Horus Eye of Ra Hedjet Hemhem crown Hennu Horus on the Crocodiles Hypocephalus Imiut fetish Khepresh Kneph Menat Modius Nebu Nemes Neshmet Ouroboros Pschent Scarab Serekh Shen ring Solar barque Tyet Ushabti Vulture crown Was-sceptre Winged sun Writings Amduat Books of Breathing Book of Caverns Book of the Dead Book of the Earth Book of Gates Book of the Heavenly Cow Book of Traversing Eternity Coffin Texts Enigmatic Book of the Netherworld Festival Songs of Isis and Nephthys Great Hymn to the Aten Litany of the Eye of Horus Litany of Re Pyramid Texts Spell of the Twelve Caves The Contendings of Horus and Seth Festivals Beautiful Festival of the Valley Cattle count Coronation of the pharaoh Min festival Mysteries of Osiris Opet Festival Sed festival Related religions Atenism Church of the Most High Goddess Gnosticism Hermeticism Kemetic Orthodoxy Kemetism Kushite religion Mysteries of Isis Temple of Set Thelema Ancient Egypt portal Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Pschent&oldid=1279113879" Categories: Crowns (headgear) Egyptian artefact types Wadjet Hidden categories: Pages using the WikiHiero extension Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 6 March 2025, at 17:00 (UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Pschent 24 languages Add topic